Creation of machine translation systems
Abstract
This paper will provide an overview of the creation process for machine translation systems using the python programming language. The translation system will be based on six language directions: Croatian-English, English-Croatian, Croatian-German, German-Croatian, German-English and English-German. The paper will study the different approaches to machine translation, with a specific focus on the example based approach, statistical approach, and the approach using neural networks. Different approaches will be evaluated based on their accuracy utilizing human and machine evaluation methods. The paper will also consider the impact of the amount of language data gathered on the accuracy of the translation for each of the approaches during the system evaluation process.
The aim of the thesis is to analyze the methods, techniques and procedures of building a machine translation system. In the research, systems will be built for 6 language courses according to 3 different approaches. Sentence pairs will be randomly extracted from each of the language course corpora to create versions of all language course corpora containing 75% and 50% of the initial language data. Thus making 54 systems in total. Machine translation systems will be built through three different approaches: 1.) based on examples 2.) based on a statistical approach 3.) based on neural network algorithms. After the construction of the system, automatic and manual evaluation and comparison of the results will be carried out.
The aim of this paper is to analyze the methods, techniques and procedures of building a machine translation system. In this research, 6 systems were created for 6 language directions (English-Croatian, Croatian-English, English-German, German-English, German-Croatian, Croatian-German). Each system is built according to 3 different approaches: example-based, approach based on statistics, and neural network algorithm-based approach, which makes, in total, 18 machine translation systems, which differ at 100% of the size of the training corpora. Furthermore, sentence pairs were randomly removed from each of the corpora in order to create versions of all language direction corpora containing 75% and 50% of the initial language data. In this way, 36 systems were additionally created, which makes a total of 54 systems. After the construction of each system, machine and human evaluation and comparison of the results were carried out.
In the research, an analysis of the translations of 54 machine translation systems was performed. The statistical approach to machine translation produced the translations with the highest quality according to the human metric, while the neural network-based system produced the highest quality translations according to the BLEU metric.
The language directions of English-Croatian and Croatian English give the highest quality results according to human metrics overall in all three approaches. While the same directions give the highest quality results according to the BLEU metric overall, the Croatian-German direction gave the highest quality results for the statistical system and the German-Croatian direction gave the best results for the neural network-based system.
The number of translation attempts decreased as the amount of data in the corpora was reduced, with a notable exception for the statistical system of machine translation where the number of attempts in some cases (for example the language direction English-German) increases while the number of correct translations continued to decrease as in other systems. Such an increase in attempts but a decrease in quality is due to the reduction in the amount of data for a statistical machine translation system also reduces the difference between the probability of a correct translation and a wrong translation, thereby forcing the system to take an action similar to guessing the correct translation.
BLEU metrics generally show an identical trend to human evaluation of correct translations, but also may sometimes show an increase in translation quality as the amount of data within the corpus is reduced. Such growth is visible in the machine translation system based on neural networks for the English-Croatian direction. The increase in translation quality according to the BLEU metric occurs due to the BLEU metric evaluating the similarity of the machine translated text to the human translated text, and as such does not take into account the possibility of a greater number of correct translations for the same source sentence within the context of the target language.

Key words: machine translation, architecture, approaches, models, neural networks, statistical machine translation, evaluation of machine translation, analysis
